Relative Abundance estiMation with Unidentified individuals using Multi-Species Occupancy Modelling

This folder contains the necessary scripts and data files to run our analyses on our empirical dataset associated with the manuscript “Estimating relative species abundance using fossil data identified to different taxonomic levels”. It will also allow the same analyses to be done on other similarly structured datasets, which we call RAMU-MSOM (short for Relative Abundance estiMation with Unidentified individuals using Multi-Species Occupancy Modelling)), to be done on other similarly structured datasets.

Within this folder, we provide two subfolders with empirical data, two subfolders containing code for the two sets of simulations described in the manuscript and a subfolder with extra data and scripts files for a part of the empirical study presented only in the supplementary information of the manuscript.

Subfolders:

* simoccu1 - Simulation 1 checks if the estimation works when all the model features are present. Also tests if raw estimates (ratios) work comparably well (they do not), and the effect of not correcting for unidentified individuals. Contains scripts and also a subfolder with our simulated datasets.

* simoccu2 - Simulation 2 checks how well the new estimation procedure, which uses individual count data, works compared to the procedure presented in Reitan et al. 2022, which used subsample count data. Also compares model estimates with raw estimates. A subfolder contains the study of the effect of observational errors. The subfolder (simdata) within simoccu2 contain simulated datasets.

* empirical_original_files - Contains the original datasets, that were collated for the input dataset for analyses ("expanded_infile.csv").

* empirical_crunched_data - Contains posterior estimates and uncertainty bands for relative abundance, occupancy probability and abundance-given-occupancy, used for plotting.

* weight_area_study - Contains the code for running the weighted average of number of subsamples versus standardized area and volume study in the SI of the ms. Also gives an example of using an alternative model in the same setup as the standard model (which we called "smalltop").


Data files in this folder: 

* expanded_infile.csv. - This is the individual count occupancy analysis data file. Contains one row per site. There is one column for each species, where the cells have the number of individuals observed for each site, for each species. Each row also has a formation number, a formation name (which can be matched with other data files), the total number of subsamples (shells), the summed weight and standardized area and volume of these shells and the number of unidentified individuals belonging to the <em>Microporella</em> genus See the "empirical dataset" folder for how this file was created.
    The following columns are mandatory: 
    1. form.nr - The number (i.e. index) of the formation/time period. Should run from 1 to number of formations. Time ordering does not matter. 
    2. Formation_name - The name of the formation/time interval. Make sure that the formation names and the formation numbers are consistent! Formation names are used for creating the additional information file in the "collate_interactions" folder, though not in the analysis scripts themselves. The formation names are however defined in the "read_data.R" script, so the analysis will throw an error as the code is now. This could however be remedied in future versions, in which case one can create the additional information file without formation names, such that this column can be omitted.
    3. K1/K2/K.mid - Should contain the start, end and middle of the formations/time intervals. This information is collated in the "read_data.R" script so is mandatory so far. However, it is not used in the analysis scripts, so could be omitted in a future version.
    4. Total - The number of subsamples at the site.
    5. std.weight/std.area - Used for the alternative scaling analysis in the SI, but not in the analysis presented here. However, the "read_data.R" script re-standardizes these values, so the script will crash without these columns. Could be omitted in future versions.
    6. Species_<genus_and_species_name> - This is a whole set of columns, one for each species. <genus_and_species_name> is here the name of each species, written as "Species_<genus_name>_<species_name>, where <genus_name> is the genus name and <species_name> is the particular species name within the genus. So "Species_Microporella_speculum" is the column for the Microporella speculum species. Each cell should contain the number of individuals observed of that particular species for that particular site.
    7. Genus_<genus_name> - This is also a whole set of columns, one for each genus, where the name of the genus is <genus_name>. So "Genus_Microporella" represents the Microprella species. Should contain the number of individuals found in each genus for each site. Used for calculating the number of identified individuals in a genus. Thus only necessary if there are genera with unidentified individuals.
    8. Unidentified_<genus_name> - One column for each genera with unidentified individuals, containing the number of unidentified individuals belonging to the genus for each site. <genus_name> is the genus name, so for instance "Unidentified_Microporella" contains the number of unidentified individuals belonging to the genus Microporella. Thus only necessary if there are genera with unidentified individuals.

*	interaction_indicators.csv - Contains one row per formation and one column per species that there is additional information for. Each cell indicates whether there exists additional information suggesting regional presence for a species in a formation (1) or not (0). See the "collate_interactions" folder for how this data file was created.

*	formation_ages.csv - Contains formation age information used for plotting.


R Scripts:

1.	Files necessary for performing MCMC analyses:

*	run_smalltop.R - An example file for how the analysis can be run. Basically only defines the model (‘model=»smalltop"’), a run identifiactor (‘run,nr’) and some MCMC run variables. The run variables are: number of MCMC samples(‘num.mcmc’), thinning (‘thin’, i.e. how many MCMC sampling is done between each retained MCMC sample) and number of CPUs used (‘cpus’). (Please note that the LaplacesDemon used for MCMC sampling creates huge temporary files if number of CPUs is bigger than 1. I prefer just starting many processes with the use of one CPU per process, now, so set ‘cpus=1’.) The script then calls the routine "3stage_cpu.R", which performs the MCMC sampling. with help from some other sub-scripts. PS. The model is called "smalltop" since the last change to out model was to introduce species random effects and so reduce the number of top parameters.

*	3stage_cpu.R - Uses the LaplacesDemon package (https://github.com/LaplacesDemonR/LaplacesDemon) to perform MCMC sampling with the help of some sub-scripts. Does this in 3 stages and allows for running on multiple CPUs at a time (hence the name). Two of these stages are burn-in sampling using two different MCMC methods, before the real sampling starts using a third method. These different methods were used in order to manually optimize the chance of getting convergence in the MCMC samples. This script uses the "read_data.R" script to read the dataset, the "model_smalltop.R" script to get the definition of the hyperparameters, the prior distribution and the likelihood, the "init_rerun.R" script in order to have routines for trying to find the best starting parameters, the "make_laplace_wrapper.R" script for creating and interface between the prior and likelihood functions and the LaplacesDemon package and the "find_best_par.R" script for finding and returning the parameter set with the highest prior times likelihood from an MCMC sample from the burn-in phases. The best parameters from "init_rerun.R" is used in as the initial parameter set in the first phase, the best parameer set from the first phase is used as the initial parameer set in the second phase, and the best parameters from the second phase is used as the intial parameter set in the third stage.

*	model_smalltop.R - This script defines the model. (There are many scripts called "model_.R" in our working directory, representing different stages in our development of the model we ended up with. One can copy and modify this script and call it something starting with "model_<...>" where "<...> stands for the new model name. and the other scripts can then call that model instead of the one given here. This setup made for rapid testing and running of new models, while still keeping the old ones. The model we ended up with is called "smalltop", since the last thing we did was to make species constants into species random effects and thus create a small set of top parameters. The script contains 4 features:
  1.	The definition of the hyperparameters (i.e. the variables that define the prior distribution of the top parameters). This is a list called "hyper" that contains the hyperparameters, but also some additional information that is sent to the prior and the likelihood (such as the number of species, number of genera, number of genera with unidentified individuals, number of formations, a set of indicators of whether a species has no detected presence in each formation ("no.presence") and another set of indicators for each species of whether there is additional information suggesting regional presence or not for each formation ("inter").
  2.	A set of initial value functions called "init.params.flat" and "init.params.flat.previousmodel". "init.params.flat" is called in the "init_reruns.R" script if no previous model is specified, while "init.params.flat.previousmodel" is called if a previous model is specified. The objectives of these two functions are to sample an intitial value for the parameter set. "init.params.flat" does this completely at random (within the bounds of hyperparameters). "init.params.flat.previousmodel" sets the parameters/random factors that the model has in common with the previous model from the mean and standard deviation of MCMC runs for the previous model. The parameters that are not common are set at random. For the run presented in the manuscript, we did not use parameter samples from the previous model, as the model seemed to converge anyhow. However, in the past we have found the use of previous (simpler) models useful.
  3.	The prior distribution function, called "logprior.flat". reads a parameter vector and the hyperparameter list and assigns the different values to different top parameters. Then calculates the logarithmic of the probability density of the prior distribution for the specified values of the top parameter.
  4.	The likelihood function, called "loglik.flat", reads a parameter vector, a data file and a set of additional information (from the "hyper" list) and outputs the logartihmic likelihood value. It first reads the parameter and random effect values from the parameter vector, then calculates the likelihood contribution from the random effect values (this could instead be in the prior distribution function, but we opted for putting it here). After that, it derives from the random effect values the occupancy and abundance given occupancy matrices (size: number of sites x number of species). In the next step, it derives the regional occupancy state from the regional occupancy random effects plus the additional data indicating regional presence and modifies the occupancy matrix accordingly. It also creates a modified abundance given occupancy matrix which takes into account identification probabilities of genera with unidentified individuals. Next, it calculates the log-likelihood value for the individual species counts based on teh occupancy and modified abundance given occupancy matrices. Lastly, if there are genera with unidentified individuals, it calculates the likelihood contribution for the unidentified individuals given the identified ones.

* init_rerun.R - Called by "stage_cpu.R" to sample initial parameters many times, and return the "best one" in terms of highest prior*likelihood. Contains two functions. "init.params.flat2" uses the "init.params.flat" function defined in "model_smalltop.R" to sample without any previously defined model. "init.params.flat2.prevmodel" instead uses "init.params.flat.prevmodel" (also defined in "model_smalltop.R") instead for sampling from a previous run.

* negbinom.R - Called by "model_smalltop.R". Contains functions defining the negative binomial distribution for the original parametrization and our parametrization ("dnegbinom1 and "dnegbinom2" respectively) and also the zero-inflated negative binomial distribution with our parametrization, on the original scale ("dnegbinom.zero") and the log-scale ("dlnegbinom.zero").

* read_data.R - Reads the individual count data from the file "expanded_infile.R". Then standardizes the subsample weights and areas (if applicable) and sets variables representing the number of species, genera, genera with unidentified individuals, formations and sites. Also defines the logit and inverse logit funciton ("logit" and "ilgoit" respectively). Calculates the midpoint of each formation age. Creates a species name vector ("sp") from the columns in the data file, and similarly with the genus names ("genusnames"). Creates a lookup table for the genus numbers of genera with unidentified individuals ("unid.genus.nr"). Then reads a file called "interaction_indicators.csv" with indicator values for whether additional information suggest regional occupancy for each species or not. Fills in with zeros the species that appear in the individual count data but not in the additional information file. Lastly, it creates a number of formation x number of species matrix called "no.presence" which indicates whether no regional presence was found in the individual count data for each formation+species combination. "1" means no presence was found, while "0" means presence was found. The variable "n.no.presence" is the seet to the sum of this matrix, so represents the number of species+formation combinations with no deteciton in the individual count data. 

* find_best_par.R - Contains code for running through MCMC samples returned from the LaplacesDemon package and find the sampled parameter set with the highest prior times likelihood. This function comes in two versions, "find.best.par.hpc" for LaplacesDemon runs with multiple CPUs that run in parallel, and "find.best.par", which does the same for single CPU LaplacesDemon runs.

* make_laplace_wrapper.R - Contains method that presents the data from "read_data.R" and the prior/likelihood functions defined in "model_smalltop.R" in a format that the LaplacesDemon package understands.


Scripts that collate the output from the MCMC sampling:

* lookat.R - Reads in the MCMC samples from multiple runs. The output from 3stage_cpu.R are stored on files called smalltop_<run number>.Rdata, so for instance the first output file from the "smalltop" model (the model presented in our study) is called "smalltop_01.Rdata". In the current script, 100 MCMC chains are fetched, though it is easy enough to change that, just set the "N.runs" variable to the number of output files you have. The script looks at the Gelman index, and plots the 4 "worst" parameters according to that index and calculates the autocorrelation length of those. Store parameter means and 95% credibility intervals for use in other scripts. Plots MCMC samples with prior and also compares those analytically for all top parameters. Outputs some statistics about regional occupancy estimates.
  
* rel_abundance_smalltop.R - Reads in the MCMC samples from multiple runs. (See "lookat.R" for how this is done). Then collates all the MCMC chains into one, and fetches random variable values in order to piece together posterior samples of site-occupancy, identification and regional occupancy probabilities as well as abundance given occupancy for each species+formation combinations. This again is used for getting the posterior (MCMC) samples of relative abundance for each species+formation. These samples are then further collated by finding the mean (estimates) and 2.5% and 97.5 quantiles (limits of the 95% credibility bands) for each of these quantities for each species+formation combination. These are then saved on files for later plotting or analyses. A preliminary plot of relative abundance (one plot for each species) is done at the end of the script.
* plot.R - Plots the relative abundance estimates, occupancy probabilities, abundance-given-occupancy and regional occupancy probabilities from the posterior estimates calcualted in "rel_abundance_smalltop.R".. The means and credibility bands are stored in the subfolder "empirical_crunched_data", while the formation ages are found in the data file "formation_ages.csv".


